Binding/xfconf (#4464)
ElektraInitiative/libelektra: src/bindings/xfconf/README.md

- infos =
- infos/author = Richard Stöckl <e11908080@student.tuwien.ac.at>
- infos/licence = BSD
- infos/status = experimental maintained
- infos/provides =
- infos/description = Elektra Bindings for xfconf

## Introduction

These bindings provide an implementation of the xfconf header files such that libelektra can be used as a drop-in replacement for xfconf.
In other words, it makes applications which rely on xfconf for their configuration use libelektra without the necessity for modifying their source code or even recompiling them.

> For further understanding how xfconf is structured, please refer to the [xfconf plugin](../../../src/plugins/xfconf/README.md#xfconf-terminology).

Reviewer: As the binding is probably the more important artifact, I would prefer if here is the general information and the plugin links here.

Author: Should be done by 6506d0e23efa25047381ef0cd2afa5aed13da3f7 or before

This binding requires the Xfce, xfconf versions `4.16` and above.

### Runtime

Beside libelektra and glib, nothing else is required at runtime.
However, as these bindings act as a drop-in replacement, the `xfconf` library might be a conflicting library if you want to install it as such.

## Installation

In order that these bindings can be used as a drop-in replacement for xfconf, the original library must be replaced.
Assuming that the library directory is `/usr/local/lib`, this can be achieved as follows:

1. copy the `libxfconfbinding.so` to `/usr/local/lib/libxfconfbinding.so.0.0.1`
2. symlink `/usr/local/lib/libxfconfbinding.so.0` to `/usr/local/lib/libxfconfbinding.so.0.0.1`
3. symlink `/usr/local/lib/libxfconfbinding.so` to `/usr/local/lib/libxfconfbinding.so.0.0.1`
4. symlink `/usr/local/lib/libxfconf-0.so.3.0.0` to `/usr/local/lib/libxfconfbinding.so.0.0.1`
5. take the symlinks `/usr/local/lib/libxfconf-0.so.3` and `/usr/local/lib/libxfconf-.so` which point to `/usr/local/lib/libxfconf-0.so` from the upstream xfconf library and place them into you system

> This can be also achieved using the [system replace script](scripts/replace-system-xfconf.sh).

Reviewer: The shell script does something quite different (much less)?

Author: I just mentioned the new packaged script new. Should be done by 6506d0e23efa25047381ef0cd2afa5aed13da3f7 or before.

These changes can be reverted with the [system restore script](scripts/restore-system-xfconf.sh).
Note, that both scripts must be run directly within the build root.

> However, there are more convenient ways to achieve that as described [below](#using-the-binding-as-a-replacement-in-xfce).

Reviewer: Probably you should describe that first then or first give an introduction of options (and describe pros/cons).

Author: Should be done by 6506d0e23efa25047381ef0cd2afa5aed13da3f7 or before. I updated the section, I hope it is much more clear now.

## Using the binding as a replacement in Xfce

It is currently possible to use this binding instead of Xfconf in order to start and use Xfce.

**Caution:** Although it is in general possible to use this binding as a replacement it is not recommended at all.

> Currently, it shows an unpredictable behavior for an unknown reason.

Reviewer: Is this still the case?

Author: No, configuring Xfconf properties should be fully possible. Should be updated by 6506d0e23efa25047381ef0cd2afa5aed13da3f7 or before.

After building, the library has to be overridden with the [user replace script](scripts/replace-user-xfconf.sh).
Again, the working directory must be the build root.
Then the Xfce configuration must be initialized using:

1. `source $HOME/.xprofile`
2. running the [population script](scripts/populate-xfconf.sh)

When done, the graphical session can be started and will now use elektra for the Xfce configuration.

To restore the usage of the systems Xfconf, it is enough to remove the `LD_*` exports from `$HOME/.xprofile`

## Debugging

For debugging purposes, it might be useful to output and log all debug messages from glib.
This can be done by appending the `G_MESSAGES_DEBUG=all` environment variable to all the above-mentioned places.
However, this is already done by the [user replace script](scripts/replace-user-xfconf.sh).
All components responsible for starting the Xfce session will log their output wherever the display-manager stores the log files.
All applications started from the command line will put their debug log to the stderr.

## Quality

> Note that this binding only handles configuration directly handles within Xfconf.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that this binding only handles configuration directly handled within Xfconf.
```

Author: Should be done by 6506d0e23efa25047381ef0cd2afa5aed13da3f7 or before

It is not able to configure settings which live outside Xfconf such as Gtk themes.

> However, since settings such as the Gtk theme part of the Xfce desktop itself, this binding is not able to configure Xfce fully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, since settings such as the Gtk theme are part of the Xfce desktop itself, this binding is not able to configure all aspects of Xfce.
```

Author: Should be done by 6506d0e23efa25047381ef0cd2afa5aed13da3f7 or before

- infos =
- infos/author = Richard Stöckl <e11908080@student.tuwien.ac.at>
- infos/licence = BSD
- infos/status = experimental maintained
- infos/provides =
- infos/description = Elektra Bindings for xfconf

## Introduction

These bindings provide an implementation of the xfconf header files such that libelektra can be used as a drop-in replacement for xfconf.
In other words, it makes applications which rely on xfconf for their configuration use libelektra without the necessity for modifying their source code or even recompiling them.

For further understanding how xfconf is structured, please refer to the [xfconf plugin](../../../src/plugins/xfconf/README.md#xfconf-terminology).

todo.

## Files

- The header files of this implementation are provided by xfconf and are not included here.
- The resulting library is called `libxfconfbinding.so`

## Classes

Explain which [classes](/doc/help/elektra-glossary.md) the library contains.
Add a link to the API documentation.

> todo.

Reviewer 2: @Eiskasten did you really want to include unfinished TODOs in this PR? (also see below)

Reviewer: tbd

## Dependencies

### Compile-Time

The xfconf library from the XFCE project is the main dependency of this plugin.

> Usually, this library is called something such as `xfconf` (Arch, Fedora, `xfconf-devel` for compiling), `libxfconf-0` (Debian, `libxfconf-0-dev` for compmiling) or `xfce4-conf` (FreeBSD) in the package manager.

Reviewer 2: Had to upgrade to Ubuntu 22.04 because of the xfconf 4.16 requirement.
```
sudo apt-get install xfconf glib-2.0 libxfconf-0-dev
```
Without `libxfconf-0-dev` i would still get:
```
-- Could NOT find Xfconf (missing: XFCONF_LIBRARY XFCONF_INCLUDE_DIR)
-- Exclude binding xfconf because xfconf >= 4.16 required for xfconf backend
```

@Eiskasten maybe include this for Ubuntu users?

Reviewer 2: And of course had to enable `xfconf` in bindings and plugins

Author: Ok, so the dev package is the same as in Debian. I will include that.

As xfconf itself depends on dbus and glib, these are dependencies too but should be installed with the package manager automatically.
This plugin is tested with the xfconf versions `4.16` and above.

### Runtime

Beside libelektra and glib, nothing else is required at runtime.
However, as these bindings act as a drop-in replacement, the `xfconf` library might be a conflicting library if you want to install it as such.

## Installation

In order that these bindings can be used as a drop-in replacement for xfconf, the original library must be replaced.
Assuming that the library directory is `/usr/local/lib`, this can be achieved as follows:

1. copy the `libxfconfbinding.so` to `/usr/local/lib/libxfconfbinding.so.0.0.1`
2. symlink `/usr/local/lib/libxfconfbinding.so.0` to `/usr/local/lib/libxfconfbinding.so.0.0.1`
3. symlink `/usr/local/lib/libxfconfbinding.so` to `/usr/local/lib/libxfconfbinding.so.0.0.1`
4. symlink `/usr/local/lib/libxfconf-0.so.3.0.0` to `/usr/local/lib/libxfconfbinding.so.0.0.1`

> 5. take the symlinks `/usr/local/lib/libxfconf-0.so.3` and `/usr/local/lib/libxfconf-.so` which point to `/usr/local/lib/libxfconf-0.so` from the upstream xfconf library and place them into you system

Reviewer 3: Would be nice, if you could provide that as a shell script...

Reviewer: I don't know what "place them into you system" means, please rephrase.

## Using the binding as a replacement in Xfce

It is currently possible to use this binding instead of Xfconf in order to start and use Xfce.

**Caution:** Although it is in general possible to use this binding as a replacement it is not recommended at all.
Currently, it shows an unpredictable behavior for an unknown reason.
A few of the undesired effects are:

- Inconsistent layout of the taskbar every session restart
- Missing symbols in menus despite being configured to appear
- Weird animations during the session startup
  One guess is, this is the result of race-conditions since Xfce consists of multiple components which concurrently read and write configuration.

Use with caution and on non-production systems such as virtual machines only.

The following instructions only have an effect on the current user which allows a quick revert through a different user.

> Build elektra as instructed in the [COMPILE](../../../doc/COMPILE.md#developer-options) and do not forget to include the `xfconfbinding` and set the `KDB_DB_SYSTEM` and `CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX` paths properly.

Reviewer 2: @Eiskasten you mean `xfconf` instead of `xfconfbinding`, right?

Reviewer 3: I suppose this was the intention:

```suggestion
Build elektra as instructed in the [COMPILE](../../../doc/COMPILE.md#developer-options) and do not forget to include the `xfconf` binding and set the `KDB_DB_SYSTEM` and `CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX` paths properly.
```
